# 17.2 Oriented Cobordism

If \( M \) is a smooth oriented manifold, then the notation \( - M \) will be used for the same manifold with opposite orientation. The symbol + will be used for the disjoint union (also called topological sum) of smooth manifolds.

Definition. Two smooth compact oriented \( n \) -dimensional manifolds \( M \) and \( {M}^{\prime } \) are said to be oriented cobordant, or to belong to the same oriented cobor-dism class, if there exists a smooth, compact, oriented manifold-with-boundary \( X \) so that \( \partial X \) with its induced orientation is diffeomorphic to \( M + \left( {-{M}^{\prime }}\right) \) under an orientation preserving diffeomorphism.

Lemma 17.2. This relation of oriented cobordism is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.

Indeed, the disjoint union \( M + \left( {-M}\right) \) is certainly diffeomorphic to the boundary of \( \left\lbrack  {0,1}\right\rbrack   \times  M \) under an orientation preserving diffeomorphism. Furthermore, if \( M + \left( {-{M}^{\prime }}\right)  \cong  \partial X \) , then clearly \( {M}^{\prime } + \left( {-M}\right)  \cong  \partial \left( {-X}\right) \) . Finally, if \( M + \left( {-{M}^{\prime }}\right)  \cong  \partial X \) and \( {M}^{\prime } + \left( {-{M}^{\prime \prime }}\right)  \cong  \partial Y \) , then using 17.1 the smoothness structures and the orientations of \( X \) and \( Y \) can be pieced together along with common boundary \( {M}^{\prime } \) so as to yield a new smooth oriented manifold-with-boundary bounded by \( M + \left( {-{M}^{\prime \prime }}\right) \) . Details will be left to the reader.

Now the set \( {\Omega }_{n} \) consisting of all oriented cobordism classes of \( n \) -dimensional manifolds clearly forms an abelian group, using the disjoint union + as composition operation. The zero element of this group is the cobordism class of the vacuous manifold.

Furthermore the cartesian product operation \( {M}_{1}^{m},{M}_{2}^{n} \mapsto  {M}_{1}^{m} \times  {M}_{2}^{n} \) gives rise to an associative, bilinear product operation

\[
{\Omega }_{m} \times  {\Omega }_{n} \rightarrow  {\Omega }_{m + n}
\]

Thus the sequence

\[
{\Omega }_{ * } = \left( {{\Omega }_{0},{\Omega }_{1},{\Omega }_{2},\cdots }\right)
\]

of oriented cobordism groups has the structure of a graded ring. This ring possesses a 2-sided identity element \( 1 \in  {\Omega }_{0} \) . Furthermore, it is easily verified that \( {M}_{1}^{m} \times  {M}_{2}^{n} \) is isomorphic as oriented manifold to \( {\left( -1\right) }^{mn}{M}_{2}^{n} \times  {M}_{1}^{m} \) . Thus this oriented cobordism ring is commutative in the graded sense.

Pontrjagin numbers provide a basic tool for studying these cobordism groups. As already pointed out in \( \text{ § }{16} \) , we have the following statement.

Lemma 17.3 (Pontrjagin). If \( {M}^{4k} \) is the boundary of a smooth, compact, oriented \( \left( {{4k} + 1}\right) \) -dimensional manifold with-boundary, then every Pontrjagin number \( {\mathrm{p}}_{{i}_{1}}\cdots {\mathrm{p}}_{{i}_{r}}\left\lbrack  {M}^{4k}\right\rbrack \) is zero.

Since the identity \( {\mathrm{p}}_{I}\left\lbrack  {{M}_{1} + {M}_{2}}\right\rbrack   = {\mathrm{p}}_{I}\left\lbrack  {M}_{1}\right\rbrack   + {\mathrm{p}}_{I}\left\lbrack  {M}_{2}\right\rbrack \) is clearly satisfied, this proves the following.

Corollary 17.4. For any partition \( I = {i}_{1},\cdots ,{i}_{r} \) of \( k \) , the correspondence \( {M}^{4k} \mapsto  {\mathrm{p}}_{I}\left\lbrack  {M}^{4k}\right\rbrack \) gives rise to a homomorphism from the cobordism group \( {\sum }_{4k} \) to \( \mathbb{Z} \) .

Now by 16.8 we obtain the following.

Corollary 17.5. The products \( {\mathbb{P}}^{2{i}_{1}}\left( \mathbb{C}\right)  \times  \cdots  \times  {\mathbb{P}}^{2{i}_{r}}\left( \mathbb{C}\right) \) , where \( {i}_{1},\cdots ,{i}_{r} \) ranges over all partitions of \( k \) , represent linearly independent elements of the cobordism group \( {\Omega }_{4k} \) . Hence \( {\Omega }_{4k} \) has rank greater than or equal to \( p\left( k\right) \) , the number of partitions of \( k \) .

Following Thom, we will prove in \( \text{ § }{18} \) that the rank is precisely \( p\left( k\right) \) ,

To conclude this section, we list without proof the actual structures of the first few oriented cobordism groups. (Compare [Wal60, p. 309].)

\[
{\Omega }_{0} \cong  \mathbb{Z}\text{ . }
\]

In fact a compact oriented 0-manifold is just a finite set of signed points, nd the sum of the signs is a complete cobordism invariant.

\[
{\Omega }_{1} = 0,
\]

since every compact 1-manifold clearly bounds.

\( {\Omega }_{2} = 0, \) since a compact oriented 2-manifold bounds.

\( {\Omega }_{3} = 0 \) .

In contrast to the lower dimensional cases, this assertion, first announced by [Rok51], is non-trivial. To our knowledge it has never been proven directly.

\( {\Omega }_{4} \cong  \mathbb{Z} \) generated by the complex projective plane \( {\mathbb{P}}^{2}\left( \mathbb{C}\right) \) .

\( {\Omega }_{5} \cong  \mathbb{Z}/2 \) generated by the manifold \( {Y}^{5} \) of Problem 16-F.

\( {\Omega }_{6} = 0. \)

\( {\Omega }_{7} = 0. \)

\( {\Omega }_{8} \cong  \mathbb{Z} \oplus  \mathbb{Z} \) generated by \( {\mathbb{P}}^{4}\left( \mathbb{C}\right) \) and \( {\mathbb{P}}^{2}\left( \mathbb{C}\right)  \times  {\mathbb{P}}^{2}\left( \mathbb{C}\right) \)

\( {\Omega }_{9} \cong  \left( {\mathbb{Z}/2}\right)  \oplus  \left( {\mathbb{Z}/2}\right) \) generated by \( {Y}^{9} \) and the product \( {Y}^{5} \times  {\mathbb{P}}^{2}\left( \mathbb{C}\right) \) .

\( {\Omega }_{10} \cong  \mathbb{Z}/2 \) generated by \( {Y}^{5} \times  {Y}^{5} \) .

\( {\Omega }_{11} \cong  \mathbb{Z}/2 \) generated by \( {Y}^{11} \) .

As manifold \( {Y}^{5} \) (respectively \( {Y}^{9},{Y}^{11} \) ) we may take the non-singular hypersurface of degree \( \left( {1,1}\right) \) in the product \( {\mathbb{P}}^{2} \times  {\mathbb{P}}^{4} \) (respectively \( {\mathbb{P}}^{2} \times  {\mathbb{P}}^{8} \) or \( {\mathbb{P}}^{4} \times  {\mathbb{P}}^{8} \) ) of real projective spaces. Using products of the generators listed above, it is easy to show that all of the higher cobordism groups are non-zero.
