# 21.1 Non-Differentiable Manifolds

The theory of real vector bundles is ideally suited to the study of smooth manifolds, just as the theory of complex vector bundles is suited to complex manifolds. If we are given some different category of manifolds, then it is useful to look for an appropriate corresponding type of bundle. Consider for example the category of all piecewise linear manifolds and piecewise linear mappings. An appropriate type of bundle for this category can be described as follows. Let \( B \) be a locally finite simplicial complex.

Definition. A piecewise linear \( {\mathbb{R}}^{n} \) -bundle over \( B \) consists of a simplicial complex \( E \) and a piecewise linear map \( p : E \rightarrow  B \) satisfying the following local triviality condition. Each point of \( B \) must possess an open neighborhood \( U \) so that \( {p}^{-1}\left( U\right) \) is piecewise linearly homeomorphic to \( U \times  {\mathbb{R}}^{n} \) under a homeomorphism which is compatible with the projection map to \( U \) . (Here the open subset \( U \) has the structure of a simplicial complex by Runge’s theorem. See [AH35].)

The piecewise linear tangent bundle of a piecewise linear \( n \) -manifold \( M \) can be constructed as follows. According to B. Mazur (unfortunately unpublished) there exists a neighborhood \( E \) of the diagonal in \( M \times  M \) so that the projection \( \left( {x, y}\right)  \mapsto  x \) from \( E \) to \( M \) constitutes a piecewise linear \( {\mathbb{R}}^{n} \) -bundle.

Furthermore this bundle is unique up to isomorphism. (For the analogous theorem in the topological category see [Kis64]. Without using Mazur's theorem, one could base this discussion on the slightly more esoteric notion of a piecewise linear microbundle. See [MW97].)

Piecewise linear \( {\mathbb{R}}^{n} \) bundles over \( B \) are classified by mappings of the base space \( B \) into certain "universal base space" or "classifying space," which is called \( \mathrm{B}\left( {\mathrm{{PL}}}_{n}\right) \) . Thus the theory of characteristic classes for piecewise linear manifolds coincides with the computation of \( {\mathrm{H}}^{ * }\mathrm{\;B}\left( {\mathrm{{PL}}}_{n}\right) \) .

Passing to the direct limit as \( n \rightarrow  \infty \) , there is a canonical map

\[
\mathrm{{BO}} \rightarrow  \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right) \text{ . }
\]

Here BO denotes the stable Grassmann manifold \( \mathop{\lim }\limits_{ \rightarrow  }{\mathrm{{BO}}}_{n} = \mathop{\lim }\limits_{ \rightarrow  }{\mathrm{{Gr}}}_{n}\left( {\mathbb{R}}^{\infty }\right) \) . According to [Hir59] and Mazur, the relative homotopy group

\[
{\pi }_{k}\left( {\mathrm{\;B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right) ,\mathrm{{BO}}}\right)
\]

is isomorphic to the group \( {\Gamma }_{k - 1} \) consisting of all oriented diffeomorphism classes of twisted \( \left( {k - 1}\right) \) -spheres (i.e., smooth manifolds obtained by pasting together the boundaries of two closed \( \left( {k - 1}\right) \) -disks). This group is trivial for \( k \leq  7 \) and is finite for all values of \( k \) . See [KM63] and [Cer68]. It follows that the rational cohomology \( {\mathrm{H}}^{ * }\left( {\mathrm{\;B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right) ;\mathbb{Q}}\right) \) is isomorphic to \( {\mathrm{H}}^{ * }\left( {\mathrm{{BO}};\mathbb{Q}}\right) \) ), being a polynomial algebra generated by the Pontrjagin classes. (Compare Section 20.) Note however that with integral coefficients, the map

\[
{\mathrm{H}}^{ * }\left( {\mathrm{\;B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right) }\right) /\text{ torsion } \rightarrow  {\mathrm{H}}^{ * }\left( \mathrm{{BO}}\right) /\text{ torsion }
\]

is not an e pimorphism. (Compare the integrality condtions in Example 2 of Section 20.) For the cohomology of B(PL) with other coefficients, see [Wil66] and [BMM73].

A fundamental theorem of [Hir59],[Mun64] and [Mun68] asserts that a piecewise linear manifold \( M \) possesses a compatible smoothness structure if and only if the classifying map

\[
M \rightarrow  \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right)
\]

for its stable tangent bundle lifts to BO (compare [MW97]), or equivalently if and only if each of a sequence of obstructions lying in the groups \( {\mathrm{H}}^{k}\left( {M;{\Gamma }_{k - 1}}\right) \) is zero.

The theory of topological \( {\mathbb{R}}^{n} \) -bundles and topological tangent bundles is completely analogous. In this case the classifying space is denoted by \( \mathrm{B}\left( {\mathrm{{Top}}}_{n}\right) \) . There is a canonical map

\[
\mathrm{B}\left( {\mathrm{{PL}}}_{n}\right)  \rightarrow  \mathrm{B}\left( {\mathrm{{Top}}}_{n}\right) .
\]

In the limit as \( n \rightarrow  \infty \) , an amazing theorem due to [KS69] asserts that the relative homotopy group

\[
{\pi }_{k}\left( {\mathrm{\;B}\left( \mathrm{{Top}}\right) ,\mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right) }\right)
\]

is zero for \( k \neq  4 \) and cyclic of order 2 for \( k = 4 \) . Further they show that a topological manifold \( M \) of dimension \( \geq  5 \) can be triangualted as a piecewise linear manifold if and only if the classifying map

\[
M \rightarrow  \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{{Top}}\right)
\]

for its stable tangent bundle lifts to \( \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right) \) , or if and only if a single topological characteristic class in the group

\[
{\mathrm{H}}^{4}\left( {M;\mathbb{Z}/2}\right)
\]

is zero.

It follows incidentally that the ring \( {\mathrm{H}}^{ * }\left( {\mathrm{\;B}\left( \mathrm{{Top}}\right) ;\Lambda }\right) \) of topological characteristic classes is isomorphic to \( {\mathrm{H}}^{ * }\left( {\mathrm{\;B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right) ;\Lambda }\right) \) for any ring \( \Lambda \) containing \( 1/2 \) . This of course implies Novikov's theorem that rational Pontrjagin classes are topological invariants.

An even broader category of "manifolds" is provided by the class of all Poincaré complexes: that is, CW-complexes \( M \) which satisfy the Poincaré duality theorem (with arbitrary local coefficients in the non-simply connected case) with respect to some fundamental homology class \( \mu  \in  {\mathrm{H}}_{n}\left( {M;\mathbb{Z}}\right) \) .

In order to study such objects, we must introduce a very different type of

"bundle." A continuous map \( p : E \rightarrow  B \) is said to be a fibration over \( B \) or to satisfy the covering homotopy property if for any space \( X \) and any map \( f : X \rightarrow  E \) any homotopy of \( p \circ  f \) can be covered by a homotopy of \( f \) . (Compare [Hur55],[Dol63].) Such a fibration is \( k \) -spherical if each fiber \( {p}^{-1}\left( b\right) \) has the homotopy type of a \( k \) -sphere.

According to [Spi64], any simply connected Poincaré complex \( M \) admits an essentially unique spherical fibration \( E \rightarrow  M \) with the property that the top homology class in the associated Thom space Th belongs to the image of the Hurewicz homomorphism

\[
{\pi }_{n + k + 1}\left( \mathrm{{Th}}\right)  \rightarrow  {\mathrm{H}}_{n + k + 1}\left( {\mathrm{{Th}};\mathbb{Z}}\right) .
\]

More precisely this fibration, called the Spivak normal bundle of \( M \) , is unique up to stable fiber homotopy equivalence (which we will not define).

According to [Sta63], such spherical fibrations over \( M \) are classified, up to stable fiber homotopy equivalence, by maps into a classifying space \( \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{F}\right) \) . There are maps

\[
\mathrm{{BO}} \rightarrow  \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right)  \rightarrow  \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{{Top}}\right)  \rightarrow  \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{F}\right) ,
\]

canonically defined up to homotopy. According to [Bro68], a simply connected Poincaré complex \( M \) of formal dimension \( n \geq  5 \) has the homotopy type of a closed piecewise linear manifold \( {M}^{\prime } \) if and only if the classifying map \( M \rightarrow  \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{F}\right) \) lifts to \( \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right) \) . (The uniqueness problem for \( {M}^{\prime } \) , studied first by [Nov67] in the differentiable case, is much more complicated.)

The homotopy group \( {\pi }_{i}\left( {\mathrm{\;B}\left( \mathrm{\;F}\right) }\right) \) is isomorphic to the stable \( \left( {i - 1}\right) \) -stem \( {\pi }_{N - i + 1}\left( {S}^{N}\right) \) for \( i \geq  2 \) and hence is always finite. The cohomology of this classifying space B(F) has been studied by [Mil70], [May06], and others.

The computations of \( {\mathrm{H}}^{ * }\left( {\mathrm{\;B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right) }\right) \) and \( {\mathrm{H}}^{ * }\left( {\mathrm{\;B}\left( \mathrm{F}\right) }\right) \) involve machinery quite dif-fereent from that developed in these notes. Rather than working out these groups from particular characteristic classes, the approaches analyze the homotopy type in terms of associated fibrations or in terms of additional internal structure. [Sul06] for example shows that, "at odd primes," BO has the homotopy type of the fiber of \( \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{{PL}}\right)  \rightarrow  \mathrm{B}\left( \mathrm{F}\right) \) . [BV06],[May06], and [Seg74] have shown that the stable classifying space B(PL), B(Top), and B(F) all have the homotopy types of infinite loop spaces, so not just the Steenrod algebra but also its homology analogue the Dyer-Lashof algebra can be brought to bear. Although the Wu classes of Section 19 and their Bocksteins play an important role ([Mil68],[Sta68]), other classes appear whose interpretation in terms of fiber space structure or geometry is far from clear [Rav72].
